The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is world building. Let's define what world building is.
First, I'd have to say that the author has to build a world starting probably
from what type of star it orbits around. Not many authors go to that much
trouble, though. They may mention the star, the particular kind of system a
planet's in, but in the past, it's usually been the practice that an author
will, if he's interested in adventure, in alien contact, in simply exploration,
he'll have his people end up on a planet. He'll have his adventures take place,
his battles, his discoveries, whatever. But not much will be given to the
planet, what kind of a planet it is, what kind of a world it is, how it's
different from Earth. And many times in that kind of story, the world, the other
planets discovered, will simply be similar to Earth, or the author won't explain
why or how they are different. Yeah, in a world building type novel, the
importance, one of the important things is is why the world is different and how
that benefits the story. Right. An author can end up accidentally making
mistakes if he doesn't do the research to back up what kind of a world he has.
He may mention something that is physically impossible. And this gets into what
Hal Clement calls the game in seeing how precise he can make his world and how
well he can make it fit to what are presently known physical laws. And the
reader, of course, tries to pick out any mistakes that he may have made in the
process. Hal Clement, you mentioned his use of the term game applied to world
building. In one of his essays, I think he actually challenged the reader. He
said, in essence, he said, OK, I've written my story. I've done it as
scientifically true as I could. It's up to you to see if I've made any mistakes.
Right. I think that article appeared in the Astounding Science Fiction in 1953.
It was added on as an addendum to his book, Mission of Gravity. And it does deal
with that particular novel in the world of Mesklin, which has got to be one of
the most incredible world-built worlds ever written for science fiction. And at
the end of that, he says something like, I couldn't possibly think of all of
these things in advance, all of the different, he's talking about all the
different criteria of the planet. Time and time again, a section of the story
had to be rewritten because I suddenly realized that things couldn't happen that
way. I must have missed details, of course, and that's where your chance to win
the game comes in.
Poul Anderson has also written many of his books with the techniques of a world
-builder, and he's written articles on it also. And I think that he shares
Campbell's interest and Clement's interest, too, in realism. Poul Anderson, I
think, emphasizes that this is something that's just for fun. I think he said
once that planet building is one of the joyous arts, if you have that sort of
mind. He said the object is to construct a strange world which is, at the same
time, wholly consistent, not only with itself, but with what science knows of
such matters. Yeah, it also takes a very serious approach, I think, to science
fiction. You have to be interested in realism, first of all, to be a world
-building author. You also have to have some scientific background. Perhaps it
doesn't have to be as extensive as a science teacher or a true scientist would
have, but you still have to know what you're talking about, for instance, in
constructing a sun. What brightness is a sun going to be? What classification,
an F-type star or an F or a G? I think our sun is a G-type star. With that kind
of intensity, what sort of planets would be revolving around that sun? Given a
certain amount of metals or minerals on the planet, certain types of minerals or
metals, what would be the mass, the density of the planet, the gravity? What
kind of flora, fauna? It's a puzzle. Yeah, it sounds rather restrictive, but
really there's a lot of latitude there that an author can use to change up his
stories and give a lot of different backgrounds. Anderson remarked that a
science fiction author who's interested in world-building can feel like a god or
a creator. And I think that's true almost in a literal sense, because he can
say, let there be light and imagine or create a particular kind of sun. And then
from there, he can go on, create the planet, create the circumstances of the
planet, the beings on it, create a culture, anything he wants to. It's a very
godlike procedure. I think he also said that it might be good therapy for the
kind of mental patient who thinks he's god. Yes, but I think there's a value to
a reader with a world-built novel, too. A solid one, I think, can be an
educational and refreshing experience for its reader. We tend to think of man as
the center of the universe, the most important creature in existence, of our
world as the center of creation. And science fiction authors have gotten into
the rut of making other worlds similar to Earth, but they must be different.
They would certainly have different suns, different mineralization, different
kinds of flora and fauna on them. They wouldn't be similar to Earth at all. But
an author who carefully constructs a different and consistent world can cause us
to see ourselves differently. We are not unique. We're not the only life form,
not the only world possible. And when we see a well-done world-built novel, we
realize that things out there are going to be different, and it might give us a
sense of humility, a freshness, a sense of wonder. I think that's probably the
greatest value of science fiction. But an author has to do that well. I think
that any science fiction author who writes of other worlds is, in a sense, world
-building. But what we're talking about here is a degree to which he does it. He
has to do it seriously and consistently and with the type of depth that will
make a difference in the story. There has to be a reason for the kinds of
details that he constructs or makes his world from. Yes. And in fact, we have a
situation here where this kind of science fiction writer is subject to the old
rule of the more that you can control, the more you must control. And so it is
his responsibility to make sure that all of his details are as correct as he can
make them in order to make the story more realistic. And I would say that they
all have to contribute something to the story. They can't be, well, they can be
there simply for realistic purposes, yes. But I think they also should have some
kind of contributing effect to the story itself.
One well-known science fiction author who uses world-building to a fairly large
extent in his work is Frank Herbert. The book Dune, of course, is one of the
greatest of all science fiction novels. Basically, he makes his world of Arrakis
a desert planet. And the lack of water is probably the most important thing that
the people on the world, the humans, have to deal with. There's an ecology theme
in the work. But the novel really revolves around the fact that you're on a
desert planet. So the world-building there would be of some importance. Anne
McCaffrey also uses world-building in the extent that forces on her world of
Pern are governed by the solar system in which it's located. When the planet
Pern comes in close contact with its sister planet called the Red Star, a spore
-like creature passes from the Red Star to the planet and wreaks havoc upon the
planet's surface. And then you could say that she uses a world-building concept
in the entire solar system in which this story takes place.
Poul Anderson is very serious about the world-building business. He's written an
article entitled, The Creation of Imaginary Worlds: The World Builder's Handbook
and Pocket Companion. He's followed the precepts in that article with his first
world-built novel, his first attempt at it. The original title of the work was
War of the Wing-Men. It was later reissued as The Man Who Counts. He wrote it
really as The Man Who Counts. It was published under that unfortunate title. And
later on, as he became more sophisticated and well-known, they republished it
with the correct title, The Man Who Counts. It's the first time that we meet the
character Nicholas Van Rijn. And the planet, of course, that he writes about in
that novel is called Diomedes. And it has one startling creature on it, I guess,
startling to us anyhow. These creatures are almost the size of men, and they can
fly. They have wings. Now, this would be impossible on Earth. This is an example
of the world-builder doing his homework. On Earth or any kind of planet that
would have our gravitational pull, there's a certain size limit beyond which a
creature could not fly. It would not have wings. So on this Earth, a winged
creature, say much larger than an albatross or a condor, would be almost
impossible. But on Diomedes, Anderson has so carefully constructed that world
that these intelligent creatures can fly. This is one of Anderson's fortes, I
think, is flying intelligent creatures. These would apparently be rare in the
universe, and they're rarely done in science fiction. But Anderson handles this
several different times in different ways. Now, in Diomedes, one of the ways he
can allow this to happen is that the world has no metals on it. Its mass is
about the same as Earth's, but the lack of metals cause it to be much lighter,
less dense. The atmosphere, the composition of the gases in the atmosphere, is
such that the air is denser. And therefore, these Diomedians, these winged
creatures, are able to use their huge wings to fly. And their whole culture is
determined by their world, the planet that they're on. For instance, the fact
that they have no metal causes these flying beings to have a Stone Age
technology. They can't manufacture any kind of technology based on metals. The
tilt of the axis of Diomedes is almost 90 degrees. The poles would be on an
elliptical plane, and this causes huge polar caps. And strange seasonal, or at
least seasonal, fluctuations would be strange to us. This causes these creatures
to have to migrate. The seasonal changes cause them to migrate, to bear their
young and so forth. And the whole culture, Anderson, has very cleverly worked it
out, whereby their way of life is based upon the world they live on. In the
story, the man who counts, as we mentioned, we see Nicholas Van Rijn for the
first time. He's one of the leading traders of the Polysotechnic League, and he
is stranded on this planet. They've come to investigate it for potential trade
purposes, and they become stranded. Their spaceship has crashed on the surface
of the planet in the ocean. The crew has very little hope of survival, of
getting off the planet. If it weren't for the wiles and the cunning of Nicholas
Van Rijn, they wouldn't have. Nicholas has no qualms about causing a war between
different factions of the wing creatures to facilitate his removal from the
planet. And he proceeds to do so with quite a bit of ingenuity and intentional
humor also. I think in that book, Anderson is definitely not obtrusive with his
world-building statistics. Authors can sometimes be obtrusive, go a little too
far in giving you numbers and statistical information. And get in the way of the
story. But this is in the background. It's there. It's helpful. In fact,
Nicholas Van Rijn uses his knowledge of these people, their physiological
makeup, the way they base their culture on the planet itself to achieve his
ends. But Anderson was involved in another project, which I think was not quite
as successful as this novel. He wrote a book entitled A World Named Cleopatra.
And it's probably one of the deepest and most thorough attempts at world
-building that I've ever read. But the setup itself was very interesting. The
book consists of four long short stories by different authors. They all take
place on a planet called Cleopatra at different times in its history. And at the
beginning of the book, there's an essay by Anderson in which he sets up the
characteristics of the planet. He tells you what kind of planetary system it's
in, the type of sun. It happens to be an F7 type sun. The statistics on the
planet, the biology, the plants, the animals, the kinds of satellites around it,
everything. In very great detail, about a 15-page article. And then he sort of
says, go to it. You authors, write your stories based upon these statistics that
I've given to you. Anderson himself writes the first story, and I think that
probably is the best one. He chronicles the adventures of the original landing
party from Earth, a group of scouts who found this planet, Cleopatra. Two men
and a woman. The conflict among them is, are they going to develop this planet?
They treat it as a fresh, uninhabited, Eden-like planet. Biologically, it's
similar to Earth in the Mesozoic period, way back in the prehistoric days. And
their conflict is, are we going to open it up? Are we going to destroy it? There
doesn't seem to be any intelligent life on it yet, although there's one
creature, vaguely humanoid, who seems to be making tools. But the basic conflict
of that first story by Anderson was simply, we have a world here like Eden, are
we going to change it? Are we going to do anything with it? The other three
stories in the volume, one by Michael Orgill, one by Jack Dann, and another by
George Zebrowski,
I didn't think they were that successful. They pick up on Anderson's statistics,
the way he's constructed the world. They base their stories on the data that
he's given them. But I don't think they reach the level of writing that you'd
expect from a good world-built novel. I think Anderson had a much better feel
for the world that he created than the other authors who wrote about it. That
may have been the problem. A world-built novel can't rely on just the world to
pull it through. It has to have a good story. And really the story should come
first in terms of what's written down for the reader to read. The world can be a
valuable asset to creating a realistic and believable background. But of course,
the story comes first. This, I think, was brought out in an article by George R.
R. Martin that was written for the Science Fiction Writers Association. And he
mentioned some of the works of Hal Clement and others as possibly the world that
was built getting in the way of the story and that this might be a negative
thing in the aspects of world-building. One thing he mentioned was that world
-builders are like artists who spend years designing frames and then hurriedly
paint a picture to put in them. Sometimes it works, but not often enough to
justify the procedure. Whether or not we agree with that, that is a valid thing
to consider if someone is going to write a world-built novel. I think he's got a
good point in the fact that sometimes when authors do write a story with world
-building as a precept, they tend to make the world one of the main characters
in the story rather than simply the background in which the story takes place.
That it sort of overshadows the plot or the aliens or the inhabitants of the
world sometimes. That's his opinion, of course. I enjoyed Clement's main work,
The Mission of Gravity, the one that he's basically talking about in this
article. Clement himself is a teacher of science. I guess you could call him a
scientist. And he's gone to great pains to make this world believable. His
planet Mesklin is, to an Earthman, a very strange world. It's not round. It's
oblate, shaped more or less like an egg. And it spins very rapidly. The gravity
at the poles is so intense that an Earthman of average size would weigh 60 tons.
At the equator, he probably would weigh about three times his normal Earth
weight. And, of course, Mission of Gravity, as the title indicates, gravity is
the overwhelming force of the novel and the major characteristic of the planet
that the Earthmen have to deal with. But Clement has, I think he's had fun
trying to imagine and create the kind of intelligent life that could live on a
planet with gravity so intense. And he's done that with the Mesklinites, who are
caterpillar-like creatures, probably about 15 inches long with pinchers. The
culture that he's given them, the way of life, everything about them, I think,
is extremely realistic. And they're very interesting aliens. I think in some
respects that he's taken these aliens and he's taken just Earthmen and Earth
-type traits and put them in an alien costume. I think this is one of the things
that Martin suggested about the novel is that the aliens were not really
realistic, that they were not alien. They were human. But on the other hand,
he's gone to a lot of trouble, Clement has, in making those aliens
psychologically different. For instance, they don't have any buildings because
they're extremely afraid of something falling on them. All they do, if they want
any kind of cover at all, they'll put a piece of cloth no more than two inches
off the ground above them because they're afraid of things falling. Probably a
six-inch fall would kill them. They have never seen anything thrown, you know,
launched from an arm or a hand. This is alien to them. And when they see
something thrown by an Earthman for the first time, it astounds them. Now that
kind of psychology is tremendously different than what an Earthman would have.
And I think that makes the aliens, among other things, very realistic. Also, if
you recall the first time that the Earthman, I think Lackland was his name, the
one who lands on the planet, he stays in his lander because of the gravity. But
one time he had to lift one of the Mesklinites, Barlennan. It's the first time
that Barlennan had ever been lifted, been off the ground. And he almost went mad.
He almost went insane. In fact, the other creatures, I think, almost attacked
the Earthman because they thought that he had killed their captain.
And so I, you know, to me that's an example of creating a different creature, an
alien, one who thinks differently, whose psychology is totally different. And I
think it's consistent with the kind of strange atmosphere, at least strange to
an Earthman, that Clement has set up on that world. If you remember also,
there's no water on this planet. The seas are methane. The planets spin so
rapidly that the days are only 17 minutes or 17 and a half minutes long.
And the basic plot of the novel, I think, is an interesting one. The basic plot
of the novel, not to elaborate too much, is that the Earthmen are having the
Mesklinites explore the planet for heavy metals. And the Mesklinites are
trying to obtain some of the Earthmen's high technology. And they eventually
come to a compromise in that the Mesklinites are going to be providing some of
the raw materials that the Earthmen need and the Earthmen are going to be
providing the advanced technology that the Mesklinites are striving for. One
interesting thing I think that Clement did here is that he based this particular
planet on a real star system. Some authors make up their own stars and some
authors use a real star system. In this case, I think he chose 61 Cygni. And at
the time that he wrote this, there was a question as to whether there might be a
dark body, which could or could not be a planet, circling around this star. If
it was a planet, it would have to be very dense. And so he took it from there
and created the planet Mesklin. I think it's probably ultimately up to the
particular reader as to whether he thinks the story is, the planet obtrudes into
the story, you know, if Clement goes too far with it. But I thought there was a
good plot to it. There's adventure. We see most of it from the point of view of
Barlennan, the native Mesklinite, this caterpillar-like creature. And his job is
a very difficult one. It's fraught with danger. He has to be a courageous,
heroic being to do what he has to do in that novel. And I think Clement has
given us a feel of what it would be like to be on a planet with such tremendous
gravity, the difficulties that would occur, the things that have to be done to
survive, to exist, to fulfill a task that he has to fulfill, that I was, I
believed. I didn't think the statistics or the data got in the way of the story
at all.
Another novel we might consider in the category of world building would be Larry
Niven's famous novel, Ringworld. Here we have an artificial world that's been
created by Larry Niven. It's a very unusual world. I don't think anything has
ever really been written quite like it. It's completely non-natural. The entire
structure where these creatures lived at one time and some of them still do at
the time of the novel was created from the raw materials of the solar system
that once existed around this particular star. I think in that novel Ringworld,
though, a picky person might question whether it's a world built novel in the
sense that Anderson and Clement conceive of one. Niven is more of an engineer, I
think, in the book rather than a creator. As you said, it's not a natural world.
It is complete unto itself and the creatures on it are what, tied in to the
ecology and the way the world has been set up. But I'm not sure I'd call it a
world built novel in the sense that it was a natural thing. I think some people
might argue with you on that point. Really, a world building novel, the term
world building, I think, comes from the author's point of view rather than
whether the world itself is really a natural one or not. I think Niven has
created a world here. It is an entire ecosystem, something that these creatures
were going to depend on for all of their existence in a physical sense. And he
created this thing as an entire habitat circling a star just as a planet would
be. In fact, Larry Niven himself is caught up in this same game that Hal
Clement's been talking about that he made some mistakes, even physics mistakes,
concerning the world that he built that some of the readers caught him on. And
in his sequel to the novel, The Ringworld Engineers, he worked out solutions to
some of these problems. I might give you a brief description of what the
Ringworld is actually like. The Ringworld is a giant band, a ring around a sun,
the distance between the sun and the ring being that approximately the distance
between the earth and the sun. The ring has mountains along the inside about a
thousand miles high on each side to contain the atmosphere, set the ring
rotating about 770 miles an hour, and it creates a gravity on the inside of the
ring of about 1 g, populated with various animals and peoples. And you have an
environment with about 3 trillion times the surface area of the earth. With this
expansive environment, Niven could postulate several different kinds of stories
to take place on the Ringworld. Especially one that is no longer as organized as
it once was when it was built. It was obviously very well organized in order to
be built at all. But now the engineers who built the Ringworld are no longer
there, apparently, and everything has fallen into a state of disorder. There are
many mutations and many things that have gone wrong all over the different areas
of the ring, which, of course, gives a great lot of source material for
adventurous stories. As long as we're talking about the artificial type of world
building, I think we should at least mention a book by almost a brand new
science fiction author, John Varley. The book is called Titan. The title Titan
comes from the, I guess you'd call it, the main character of the book. It
happens to be an artificially constructed planet. It's contacted and entered by
an Earth crew scouting for life in the solar system. And they find out that this
planet has been made. It looks natural. It's got soil. It's got trees. Many
cultures, oceans, continents, different kinds of flowers, different kinds of
creatures. And at first they don't realize that it's artificial. But the planet
itself is alive. There's a sentience. There's a creature behind it who is making
things happen, who is creating things on that planet. And it's a very
interesting approach, I think, to, you might even call it halfway between an
artificially built world and a naturally built one. The final novel that we'll
consider as a world-built book will be the novel Big Planet by Jack Vance. But
Big Planet's an adventure story. It has good guys, bad guys, fair maidens,
heroism, human enemies, monsters, all sorts of things. But the core of the plot
is a journey across the planet. 40,000 miles this group of Earth people have to
go to save themselves. And their enemies are out to stop them. Now the planet is
called Big Planet for a reason. It has two qualities of significance. The first
being that it is big. It's huge. And this affects the novel in a lot of ways.
The mountains, the plains, the rivers, everything is on a huge scale. Secondly,
there is absolutely no metal on the planet. There is no technology, therefore.
The inhabitants cannot use anything that would be made from metal. They have to
depend upon wood, leather, stone, and so forth. Now the gravity of the planet is
very close to Earth gravity because of the lack of metals. Even though the
planet is huge, the gravity is close to Earth because of this fact. And I think
probably the hallmark of the novel is the ingenuity of Vance in detailing the
culture of a planet of that size without any metals. How would people achieve
any kind of civilization without metal? How would they progress? How would they
build? And he does that with great delicacy, great depth and sophistication, I
think. For instance, to travel. They've erected this huge monoline system of
towers from mountain peaks to plains all over the planet with monolines,
filaments, between the towers. And they can travel over these lines in aerial
carriages with sails on them. And they're able to cross great distances with
this. But it's always a pleasure to read a book by Vance because he does such a
fine job in detailing alien cultures, their way of life, their differentness
from Earth. And I think Big Planet would very definitely qualify as one of the
better world-built books.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.